How can we make this code not have any side effects.
Not change whatever the array is.
Well we can create a new array.
Let's do that.
Let's change it so that the mutate array will now be called remove last item and in here let's create
a new array and this new Ray will will copy using the cone cat method that comes with the race.
And now this new array will be the exact same thing as an array.
But because we use the cone cat method instead of just doing equals array which would have copied the
array but the reference to the array remember because object are passed by reference and JavaScript
instead of then pointing to the same location.
This way we have a new copy of the array and now we can just do new Array dot pop and return new Array
let's see if that works.
If I comment this out and just run the mutated array and let's make sure we rename that if I run this
I see my original array.
All right.
I still have that but if I look at the console log of
remove last item and I click run here.
I see that that array there's a new one with just one and two in there.
And although we created a new state or new data inside of this function it's a local variable right
and we're not modifying anything outside of our scoped world right here although we're doing pop right
here.
It doesn't matter because we're not affecting the outside world and that's the beauty with no side effects
because it doesn't affect the outside world.
We know what to expect from it if we go back to this code of adding a 1 to the end of this array we
can just accept a new array and once again we can copy the code that we had above and let's say that
we want to multiply the array by 2 so we can just say multiply by 2 we get an array and this time we'll
just use a will return in new array using the map method which automatically returns us in your array
saying all or a dot map item and then item multiply by two so that if I ran multiplied by two here
and I click run not on my arrays are changed as you see here from the console log.
But if I do console dialogue multiply by two and I hit run look at that I have three distinct arrays
and all these functions have no side effects.
It doesn't affect anything in the outside world just to confirm this.
I'm going to say array 2 equals remove last item and then we'll do constant array 3 equals multiply
by 2 and then here in the console log I'm just going to say array 2 and array 3.
If I click Run look at that different arrays living on their own no side effects so when it comes to
no side effects I have a few questions for you.
What happens if I have a function.
A.
In this function a says console dot log.
Is that a pure function no it's not.
That's a tricky one but console dialogue is well window specific.
We're using the browser to log something to the browser.
So it's actually affecting the outside world.
Right.
It's logging something to the output of the browser.
It's modifying something outside of itself.
But when we call this while we're out putting something out here so that function has side effects.
All right let's go to the next one.
The input should always result in the same output.
Does the function always return the same output given the same input if I click run here.
Well I can click this many times and a function is always going to return the same thing.
That's great.
What if I do a number one and number two if I do return num one plus num to if I click Run I have to
give it some parameters.
So let's do three and four click Run and I click many many times and it's always seven and this is what
we call referential transparency and referential transparency simply means if I completely change this
function to the number seven will affect any part of my program.
For example if I had function b here and function b takes a number and it multiplies this number by
two
if I do B and because functions are first class citizens in javascript I can say a 3 and 4 here.
So I'm calling the inner function here and then calling B let's see what happens.
I get 14 referential Transparency says if I change this to 7 will it have any effect on the program.
And no it doesn't.
Because of this rule no matter what my input if they're the same it's always going to give me the same
output and as a matter of fact these functions also have no side effects right.
They're not touching any of the outside world.
They're only touching their own parameters and parameters.
If you remember are local variables to review the biggest thing in functional programming and we'll
find out why this is such a big deal.
Later on as well the idea with pure functions is that it makes functions very easy to test very easy
to compose and it avoids a lot of bugs because we have no mutations no shared state.
We have these predictable functions that minimize the bugs in our code.
But is it possible to have pure functions everywhere.
Can you have a 100 percent pure functions.
Think about that and let's answer that in the next video.
By.